In order to measure the pion absorption xs the event selection for incident
pions and pion absorption candidates has to be performed.

Most of the macros use the ROOT::RDataFrame libraries to analyse the .root
output files of the PDSPanalyzer.


The event selection should be performed on the pduneana outputs of the
PDSPAnalyzer_module:
https://wiki.dunescience.org/wiki/PDSPAnalyzer


===== First Step ========= Event Selection ============

The first step is to run the event selection on the PDSPanalyzer root output
files.

The event selection is performed on the mcFiles and data files in parallel
Output files are generated containing the selection and some new relevant
branches for further analysis

Relevant files:   eventSelection.h
                  eventSelection.h

Specification for the macros:    input names of PDSPanalyzer ntuples
                                 
Output files: eventSelection_mc_all.root
              eventSelection_data_all.root

Command:
            root -l 'eventSelection.C("path/to/MC/file.root",
            "path/to/Data/file.root")'

=======================================================

===== Second Step ===== dEdx, trackpitch Values wire per wire for beam
particles ============

The macro dEdx_track_vs_wire_mcData.C runs on the output files of the
eventSelection.C

TH2D are produced that contain the dEdx and trackPitch vs wire values for beam
Pion candidates. The TH2D's are produced and saved in the same file for mc and
Data.

Note, this can be done only for same momentum runs. Ideally it would be done
on a particle by particle basis but due to crossing cosmics it is done for all
beam particles

Macro:   dEdx_track_vs_wire_mcData.C

Input Files: eventSelection_mc_all.root
             eventSelection_data_all.root

Output File:
output_dEdx_track_vs_wire_mcData.root

Command:
      root -l 'dEdx_track_vs_wire_mcData.C("path/eventSelection_mc_all.root", "path/eventSelection_data_all.root")'


=======================================================

===== Third Step ===== fit dEdx and trackpitch for MC and Data ============

for each wire of APA3 from beam entry point the values of all recorded 1GeV pion
candidates dEdx and track pitch is fitted

dEdx is fitted with a landau and the MPV is extracted
the mean of dEdx is extracted by applying the ratio of betheBloch Pion
mean/mpv dEdx for 1GeV pions (fitting the mean of a landau comes along with a
large uncertainty)
trackPitch is fitted with a gaussian and the mean is extracted

for each wire the fit values are saved, The fit values are saved in TH1D as
fit value vs wire

the input files are the output of second step

Macro:   fit_dEdx_mc.C
         fit_dEdx_data.C

Input: output_dEdx_track_vs_wire_mcData.root

Command:
      root -l 'fit_dEdx_mc.C("path/output_dEdx_track_vs_wire_mcData.root")'
      root -l 'fit_dEdx_data.C("path/output_dEdx_track_vs_wire_mcData.root")'

Output: output_fit_mc_Prod4_eSlice.root
        output_fit_data_Prod4_eSlice.root


=======================================================

Preparations have been made to continue with the eSlice Method and extract the
XS by means of unfolding

-----eventSelection_*_all.root-----
contains selected incident pions and pion absorption candidates for MC and
data

-----output_fit_*_Prod4_eSlice.root----
contains the fit values of dEdx and trackPitch for pion candidates on each
wire. This is used to create a map of deposited energy at each wire
where the energy is computed as the sum of dEdx*trackPitch starting from the
beam entry point at wire 0 (68, bc of SCE effects)

a pion that reaches wire 200 will have deposited the energy that is found as
the sum of all dEdx*pitch until wire 200.


=======================================================
=======================================================
      continue with eSlice Method
=======================================================




===== First Step ===== prepare Branches for eSliceMethod ============

run a macro to prepare the root file that includes the relevant branches of
initial kinetic energy and interacting kinetic energy to continue with the XS
extraction via eSliceMethod

in MC also the reco initialKE and interactingKE are reweighted as the initial
KE distributions of MC and data are slightly shifted and do not have the same
width. the true_interKE is also built with the method of the running sum of
bethe bloch (computed for 1GeV pions) in order to match up with how the
reco_interKE is built.

Macros
         MC: eSliceMethod_branchPrepMC.C
         Data: eSliceMethod_branchPrepData.C

Command (where * is either data or mc)
      root -l 'eSliceMethod_branchPrep*.C("path/eventSelection_*_all.root","path/output_fit_*_Prod4_eSlice.root", "eSliceMethod_*_eventFile.root")'

Output
         eSliceMethod_*_eventFile.root

            file with pion events that now
            contain the necessary branches, this will be used for XS extraction
            with unfolding

         eSliceMethod_energyDeposit_*.root

            file with deposited energy distribution to extract initial and
            interacting KE of the pions



===== Second Step ===== extract XS with eSliceMethod and unfolding ============

eSliceMethod_unfoldBayes_XS_dataMC.C extracts the unfolded XS for the total
Inelastic (needs improvement?) and the absorption processes for data and MC


in order to run the final XS extraction with the eSliceMethod and unfolding it
is necessary to install and load the RooUnfold libraries: https://roounfold.web.cern.ch/
the rootlogon.C file includes the command to load the RooUnfold libraries once
they are installed in your ROOT version.

To understand which events contribute to the Response Matrix, the Missed and
the Fake containers please read Chapter 7 of my thesis.

The macro writes out a lot of useful information for the unfolding to the
terminal

Command
      root -l 'eSliceMethod_unfoldBayes_XS_dataMC.C("path/eSliceMethod_mc_eventFile.root", "path/eSliceMethod_data_eventFile.root")'

Output
   unfold_xs_data_xxMeV.root is the output of the unfolded XS, the xx stands
   for the binwidth chosen for the measurement (normally 50MeV)


===== Addendum ===== validation of unfolding on MC ============

eSliceMethod_unfoldBayes_xs_MCvalidation.C

      

=======================================================
                     other macros
=======================================================

------------------Plots-------------------------------
All macros that were used to produce the thesis plots are named as
thesisPlot_*.C, they take usually mcFile and dataFile coming out of the
branchPrep macros to produce the thesis Plots


the XS plot with the systematics is available in thesisPlot_systematic_xs.C

----------------------Systematic Variation---------------------------

For a set of systematics the MC has been varied (which influences unfolding)
the macros to find the results of the xs with the varied MC are all in
unfoldSystematic_bayes_*.C macros.




